apply ACPERM rules in order (#427)
riscv/riscv-cheri: src/insns/acperm_32bit.adoc

format shown in xref:acperm_bit_field[xrefstyle=short].
. Calculate the bitwise AND of the bit field with the mask `rs2`.
. If the AP and <<m_bit>> field in `cs1` could not have been produced by <<ACPERM>> then
clear all AP permissions and the <<m_bit>>, and skip the next step
clear all AP permissions, and the <<m_bit>> to {CAP_MODE_VALUE}. Skip the next step.
. Clear AP permissions as required to meet the rules below.
. Encode the AP permissions for MXLEN=32 according to <<cap_perms_encoding32>>.
. Encode the AP permissions for RV32 according to <<cap_perms_encoding32>>.
. Copy `cs1` to `cd`, and update the AP and SDP fields with the newly calculated versions.
. Set `cd.tag=0` if `cs1` is sealed or if any reserved fields of `cs1` are set.
+
Some combinations of permissions cannot be encoded for MXLEN=32, and are not useful when MXLEN=64.
These cases are defined to return useful minimal sets of permissions, which may be no permissions.
+

> NOTE: Future extensions may allow more combinations of permissions, especially for MXLEN=64.

Reviewer: Please keep something along these lines in the specification so that CHERIoT's permission semilattice could be a valid extension of Zcheripurecap.

Reviewer 2: Agreed, I'd suggest keeping this note.

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
+
Some combinations of permissions cannot be encoded for MXLEN=32, and are not useful when MXLEN=64.
These cases are defined to return useful minimal sets of permissions, which may be no permissions.
+
NOTE: Future extensions may allow more combinations of permissions, especially for MXLEN=64.
```

Reviewer 2: Let's keep this note as suggested.

| Rule            | Permission   | Only valid if
|  1  (RV32 only) | <<asr_perm>> | All other permissions are set.
|  2              | <<c_perm>>   | <<r_perm>> or <<w_perm>>
|  3  (RV32 only) | <<c_perm>>   | <<r_perm>>
|  4  (RV32 only) | <<x_perm>>   | <<r_perm>>
|  5  (RV32 only) | <<w_perm>>   | not(<<c_perm>>) or <<lm_perm>>
|  6  (RV32 only) | <<x_perm>>   | <<w_perm>> or <<c_perm>>
|  7              | <<el_perm>>  | <<c_perm>> and <<r_perm>>
|  8              | <<lm_perm>>  | <<c_perm>> and <<r_perm>>
|  9  (RV32 only) | <<x_perm>>   | <<c_perm>> == <<lm_perm>> == <<el_perm>>
| 10              | <<sl_perm>>  | <<c_perm>>
| 11              | <<asr_perm>> | <<x_perm>>
| 12              | <<m_bit>>    | <<x_perm>>
|===

The behaviour of currently illegal combinations from <<acperm_rules>> is to clear the permission if invalid (or in the case of <<sl_perm>> set it to 0 (_local_)).

* For RV64 all such combinations may be redefined by future extensions.

> * For the RV32 only rules none of these combinations are possible to meet the encoding requirements for <<cap_perms_encoding32>>, or

Author: ```suggestion
* The RV32 only rules are added because they remove combinations which do not meet the encoding requirements for <<cap_perms_encoding32>>, or
```

> <<cap_perms_encoding_levels32>> if <<cheri_levels_ext,{cheri_levels_ext_name}>> is implemented. In all cases invalid permissions are cleared.

Author: ```suggestion
<<cap_perms_encoding_levels32>> if <<cheri_levels_ext,{cheri_levels_ext_name}>> is implemented.
```

format shown in xref:acperm_bit_field[xrefstyle=short].
. Calculate the bitwise AND of the bit field with the mask `rs2`.
. If the AP and <<m_bit>> field in `cs1` could not have been produced by <<ACPERM>> then
clear all AP permissions, and the <<m_bit>> to {CAP_MODE_VALUE}. Skip the next step.
.. If <<cheri_levels_ext,{cheri_levels_ext_name}>> is implemented then also set <<section_cap_level,CL>> to 0 (_local_).
. Clear AP permissions as required to meet the rules below.
. Encode the AP permissions for RV32 according to <<cap_perms_encoding32>>.
. Copy `cs1` to `cd`, and update the AP and SDP fields with the newly calculated versions.
. Set `cd.tag=0` if `cs1` is sealed or if any reserved fields of `cs1` are set.

The rules from <<acperm_rules>> must be followed when removing permissions.

[#acperm_rules]
.ACPERM common rules
[%autowidth,float="center",align="center",cols="3,3,3",options="header"]
|===
| Rule            | Permission   | Only valid if
|  1  (RV32 only) | <<asr_perm>> | All other permissions are set.
|  2              | <<c_perm>>   | <<r_perm>> or <<w_perm>>
|  3  (RV32 only) | <<c_perm>>   | <<r_perm>>
|  4  (RV32 only) | <<x_perm>>   | <<r_perm>>

> |  5  (RV32 only) | <<w_perm>>   | not(<<c_perm>>) or (<<c_perm>> and not(<<lm_perm>>))

Reviewer 3: `not(<<c_perm>>) or (<<c_perm>> and not(<<lm_perm>>))`

Simplifies to

`not(<<c_perm>>) or not(<<lm_perm>>)`

The negation (condition to clear) for that is `<<c_perm>> and <<lm_perm>>` which does not correctly match what it was before (clear if `<<c_perm>> and NOT <<lm_perm>>`).

This row should be:

|  5  (RV32 only) | <<w_perm>>   | not(<<c_perm>>) or <<lm_perm>>))

Author: ok fixed

|  6  (RV32 only) | <<x_perm>>   | <<w_perm>> or <<c_perm>>

> |  7  (RV32 only) | <<x_perm>>   | <<c_perm>> == <<lm_perm>> == <<el_perm>>

Reviewer 3: Disagree with the order here.

if I have a `Execute + Data & Cap RW` and strip C, I expect to end up with `Execute + Data RW`. This would drop me out of X completely.

Rules 9 and 10 should apply first.

Author: understood - fixed

> |  8              | <<sl_perm>>  | <<w_perm>> and <<c_perm>>

Reviewer 3: Still very much of the opinion that it was correct above and this was only conditioned on C, not W,  so that a read-only cap could still have a store-level for the purpose of future extensions where we limit the store level transtively.

Reviewer 3: I meant the text before change "as above" (just because thats where it appeared on my screen...)

It was

```
. <<sl_perm>> cannot be set without <<c_perm>> being set
.. Zero <<sl_perm>> unless <<c_perm>> is set.
```

Which had no condition on W. This is not to protect a transition, but to ensure if we introduce a future implict ANDPERM with SL on load, then even capabilities without W can theoretically have an SL so that such an AND does what we want.

format shown in xref:acperm_bit_field[xrefstyle=short].
. Calculate the bitwise AND of the bit field with the mask `rs2`.
. If the AP and <<m_bit>> field in `cs1` could not have been produced by <<ACPERM>> then
clear all AP permissions, and the <<m_bit>> to {CAP_MODE_VALUE}. Skip the next step.
.. If <<cheri_levels_ext,{cheri_levels_ext_name}>> is implemented then also set <<sl_perm>> to 0 (_local_).
. Clear AP permissions as required to meet the rules below.
. Encode the AP permissions for RV32 according to <<cap_perms_encoding32>>.
. Copy `cs1` to `cd`, and update the AP and SDP fields with the newly calculated versions.
. Set `cd.tag=0` if `cs1` is sealed or if any reserved fields of `cs1` are set.

The rules from <<acperm_rules>> must be followed When removing permissions.

[#acperm_rules]
.ACPERM common rules
[%autowidth,float="center",align="center",cols="2,3,3",options="header"]
|===
| Rule | Permission   | Only valid if

> |  1   | <<c_perm>>   | <<r_perm>> or <<w_perm>>

Reviewer 2: Maybe this is simpler if we merge the tables and just do something like this:
```suggestion
|  1             | <<c_perm>>   | <<r_perm>> or <<w_perm>>
|  2 (RV32-only) | <<c_perm>>   | <<r_perm>>
```
Could also use a footnote instead of the parens?

Author: reformatted into one table

|  9   | <<lm_perm>>  | <<c_perm>> and <<r_perm>>
| 10   | <<asr_perm>> | <<x_perm>>
| 11   | <<m_bit>>    | <<x_perm>>
3+| See <<acperm_rules_rv32>> for rule 12 (RV32 only)
|===

The behaviour of currently illegal combinations from <<acperm_rules>> is to clear the permission if invalid (or in the case of <<sl_perm>> set it to 0 (_local_)).

* For RV64 all such combinations may be redefined by future extensions.
* For RV32 none of these combinations are possible.

RV32 needs additional rules as some combinations which are legal on RV64 are not possible on RV32.
These rules are specifically to meet the encoding requirements for <<cap_perms_encoding32>>, or
<<cap_perms_encoding_levels32>> if <<cheri_levels_ext,{cheri_levels_ext_name}>> is implemented.

[#acperm_rules_rv32]
.ACPERM RV32 additional rules
[%autowidth,float="center",align="center",cols="2,2,3",options="header"]
|===
| Rule | Permission   | Only valid if
|  2   | <<c_perm>>   | <<r_perm>>
|  3   | <<x_perm>>   | <<r_perm>>
|  4   | <<w_perm>>   | not(<<c_perm>>) or (<<c_perm>> and not(<<lm_perm>>))
|  5   | <<x_perm>>   | <<w_perm>> or <<c_perm>>
|  6   | <<x_perm>>   | <<c_perm>> == <<lm_perm>> == <<el_perm>>

> | 12   | <<asr_perm>> | All other permissions are set.

Reviewer 2: This could also be the first step, right? If we have all perms initially then the check is a no-op, and if anything is missing we also clear ASR.

Author: yes I think that's fair comment - if anything missing after ANDing then clear ASR

+
NOTE: Future extensions may allow more combinations of permissions, especially for MXLEN=64.

All rules are applied in the order shown on this page.

> 

Reviewer 2: I guess the main problem is that the RV32 rules need to be inserted at the right location. Maybe we should change this to a list that includes all of them in order and prefix the RV32 ones with `RV32-only:...`

Author: ok - we've reworked the rules - please have a look

|  2              | <<c_perm>>   | <<r_perm>> or <<w_perm>>
|  3  (RV32 only) | <<c_perm>>   | <<r_perm>>
|  4  (RV32 only) | <<x_perm>>   | <<r_perm>>
|  5  (RV32 only) | <<w_perm>>   | not(<<c_perm>>) or <<lm_perm>>
|  6  (RV32 only) | <<x_perm>>   | <<w_perm>> or <<c_perm>>
|  7              | <<el_perm>>  | <<c_perm>> and <<r_perm>>
|  8              | <<lm_perm>>  | <<c_perm>> and <<r_perm>>
|  9  (RV32 only) | <<x_perm>>   | <<c_perm>> == <<lm_perm>> == <<el_perm>>

> | 10              | <<sl_perm>>  | <<w_perm>> and <<c_perm>>

Reviewer 3: `10              | <<sl_perm>>  | <<w_perm>> and <<c_perm>>`

Should be

`10              | <<sl_perm>>  | <<c_perm>>` ?
